Okay, George, the tapes are rolling.
Okay, you decided to be a writer at an early age.
Why did you choose science fiction?
It seemed to me that science fiction always seemed the natural kind of writing.
I grew up reading science fiction and its materials and the kinds of possibilities that it opened up to myself as a reader
seemed to belong peculiarly to this time as opposed to the feeling I got when I read Charles Dickens or the 19th century writers,
Cy from Wells of course, who straddled both centuries.
It seemed to belong uniquely to the 20th century.
Of course, I didn't think about it that way.
That came much later.
But I think the instinctive reaction was that it was something that was for me and that it belonged to my time.
When you were young, you were fairly active in fandom and you had a magazine called Epilogue.
Can you tell us a little bit about that?
Well, it ran for three issues.
It started out as a publication called Viewpoint.
Then the next two issues were called Epilogue Viewpoint.
They were fairly elaborately produced magazines for their time.
Photo offset with as much type setting fakery as you could bring about in a paste-up job.
I think they can be seen in Sam Moskowitz's collection now.
I don't even own the first two issues anymore.
People like Buster Del Ray, Judith Merrill, Michael Morkock were published in the magazine.
We were very militant about the future possibilities of a more literate science fiction.
We were down on boroughs and Edward Eastman and people of that kind.
Perhaps unfairly at the time, but we were very militant about things.
I guess you might say that we were the American arm of the British New Waves.
They seemed to find those of the British New Wave who wrote into us found Kindred Soles among us.
Mike Morkock especially said it was just about the best American fanzine that he had ever read.
That it set a high standard for discussion.
Even somebody like Tom Borden, the American fan said that here is a fanzine that sets a standard higher than just about any other fanzine at the time.
This is 1962-63.
Other people who discovered it said that there was a science fiction and fantasy fanzine, not a fandom fanzine.
There were maybe 200 copies of each one circulated.
I was quite proud of it at the time, but when I came to college I'm afraid it just went by the wayside.
I read that you met Arthur C. Clarke when you were quite young at a science fiction convention.
No, I went to an American rocket society exposition at the Coliseum in New York.
I was looking at some displays of spaceships and somebody said, oh, that's the Clark spaceship.
It was a certain design, very much like the lunar excursion mine until later years.
I turned to my right and kneeling on the floor looking at one of the pictures was Arthur C. Clarke.
I just couldn't believe it.
He later introduced me to Wernher von Braun and Willie May and some of the NASA people.
I just was bowled over. I couldn't believe this had happened to me.
He seemed very encouraging and very interested in what I had to say.
It was very important. I'd read most of his books up to that time.
You can imagine how I felt.
Do you still correspond with Arthur C. Clarke?
I had occasion to reprint some of his articles notably in Faster Than Light, which will be out in paper back next month, by the way.
I've corresponded to him about macro life.
I felt that his feeling that he has for, say, the solar system almost as if he were a regionalist of some kind,
writing about his own backyard in the way that a southern writer might be a regionalist, the way the Faulkner was a regionalist,
the special feeling that he has for the nature of the universe and for the natural realm in general.
I always thought of Clarke as very much like Bradbury in his poetic sense.
In nonfiction, there is a writer by the name of Lauren Hivesley who seems to combine Clarke's feelings for the universe
with a kind of Bradbury writing approach.
Bradbury, Clarke, Chad Oliver all seem to display this kind of authentic feeling for the universe.
Still very dear to me, I'm afraid.
Your background is in philosophy, so that gives you a bit of insight into the philosophy presented in science fiction that most of us don't have.
In your opinion, has science fiction treated philosophy well? Has it developed anything new or is it mainly kind of a skin deep,
lukewarm fashion that it's treated?
Well, it's skin deep and this is surprising possibly to a literature that professes to be a literature of ideas
and yet two areas, philosophy and cosmology, seem to be very poorly represented even though you would think that science fiction
would cover these fields in a very deep fashion.
But this is not really surprising.
Most fiction, most literature does not use philosophy in any original sense.
What I mean is that philosophy is usually derived from somewhere else, from some thinker and then is simply put to some use as background
in a science fiction story or even in a contemporary novel.
Most writers are not original thinkers in this regard.
Even Stapledon, who is the most overtly philosophical of science fiction writers, is clearly a spinosa following the philosophy of spinosa kind of pantheism.
There is not any original philosophizing going on.
Of course, it would be ideal if you could have a science fiction writer who would be an original thinker and would present original thinking of a philosophical kind in his science fiction.
But then you might say, why doesn't he just write a book of philosophy and then perhaps use the original philosophical material that he himself puts forward in his fiction.
Lev does this to some degree.
He's written philosophical works of enormous size and then used the ideas developed there for his science fiction.
That's very, very rare.
The kind of marketplace that science fiction has just doesn't demand that you become a philosopher or a scientist of any original stature to write science fiction.
Fred Hoyle, Arthur Clark, Greg Benford are very good scientists of one kind or another.
They also use that for science fiction.
But I don't think they became scientists in order to write science fiction.
That would be a level of ambition that has not been directed at this field.
At one time you apparently came to the crossroads of whether to devote yourself to the academic life, presumably philosophy, or to become a full-time writer.
What kind of factors influenced your decision to become a writer instead of an academic?
Well, it had always been a tug of war.
I went to college with the thought that it couldn't hurt.
I do have a tremendous respect for the virtues of academia, the kind of honesty that goes into original work in a particular field.
I still have a lot of regard for this despite the fact that individuals and individual institutions fall far short of it.
Writing was a pursuit of a certain kind of beauty, the kind of beauty that you would find in music perhaps.
It was always known in my philosophy department that I was being pulled into directions.
When the crunch came and it was clear that there were very limited numbers of spaces in American philosophy of the academic source,
I rebelled and I saw that there was really no need for being a philosopher in a university.
They liked you to believe that you can only be a philosopher if you are associated with a university.
Many philosophers in history have not been associated with universities.
The universities now would like to think that they own philosophy just like the English department,
think that they own English literature or literature in general.
Without them, you are not a true believer.
But I saw that you could perhaps go another route.
I kind of like the independence of being a freelance writer.
As long as it lasts, conceivably the market gets so bad that it would become impossible to have this kind of career be this kind of figure.
I hope not.
I want to throw in a new question here, George.
I understand that you are also a graduate of the Clarion Science Fiction schools or groups or whatever.
Did you find that a help? Did that really set you up?
Well, 1968 rolled around and I was right at the crossroads whether to become a teaching assistant in philosophy
or whether to bite the bullet and do something to become a writer.
When Clarion popped up in the announcement, I said, I'll go.
I got together the money and made the effort.
But primarily it was an effort, it was a kind of cheerleading kind of effort where I went through a certain kind of procedure, a ritual, so to speak,
to gain the encouragement from outside that this was possible, that it was more than just a pipe dream, that you could do this for real.
And the primary influence of Clarion on me was that I went and I did the work assigned.
I don't think I learned anything of a drastic kind that I didn't know already.
But it just gave me the framework in which I could feel that it was going to be possible.
I gained a lot from Fritz Lieber, who was one of my teachers.
I met Judith Merrill, Damon Knight, Harlan Ellison, who provided a tremendous example of industriousness at that time.
This was 1968, this was the first Clarion workshop, which also had Ed Bryant beside myself and Jim Sutherland and Evanda,
not I'm sorry, Evelyn Leith, a few other people, Neil Shapiro, all of whom went on to write stories and novels.
I think probably Bryant and myself are the best known from that year.
It was important, but it was more of the kind of thing that you pull when you give a little kid a glass of colored water to drink,
so that he'll be able to ride a bicycle and he simply believes you and rides the bicycle without falling off.
But you see what I mean.
Oh yeah.
Let me add here one thing that's difficult for us when we're interviewing my phone is knowing exactly when you're finished,
so sometimes there may be a pregnant pause between questions.
Okay, you've been quoted as saying that in the last decade you've been too heavily influenced by the commercial aspects of science fiction.
When you write a book or a short story, whom do you aim for as an audience?
Well, I don't particularly aim for any audience.
I simply aim to be clear and to communicate to any reader who can read fiction.
The idea being that such a reader will understand what you have to say.
What you're doing is you're forming an impression within the mind of a hypothetical intelligent reader
in such a way that there'll be no question as to what you mean and what impression or what atmosphere you wish to create.
I think I simply follow the idea of most writers that you have to communicate.
At least one writer has told us that, face it, writers are entertainers.
Do you have this view or at least a hybrid of this view and something else?
Well, you have to understand what you mean by entertainment.
I'm entertained by a great variety of things.
I'm entertained by hard thinking.
I'm entertained by poetry, by music, by serious theater.
I believe that it's better to be capable of being entertained by a great variety of things.
Now, many of these things are exactly the kind of things that most people do not find entertaining.
They find them didactic or dull.
And I think they're simply missing something.
They are entertained by smaller range of things.
In the past, you've been critical of science fiction as a field where writers can take the easy way out.
Instead of coming up with something original, they just follow a formula and seem to be doing okay.
Is this trend continuing, getting worse, getting better? What?
Well, if you consider that science fiction has been anywhere between 10 and 15 percent of all fiction published,
a great number, a great amount of it is a derivative built on predigested ideas and predigested plots.
And a good example takes to the concept of space colonies or the L5, the society type of thing.
It's very often simply been used as just another place to have an adventure of some kind,
or a place to set a murder mystery or a suspense story of some kind or another.
Predigestion seems to be the operative method of the copiers.
Something comes in and it's slightly new and it's not used for itself.
It's used as just another place to have another barbaric adventure or whatever.
It's easier to do this than to be original in each and every case.
I'm afraid that like many other writers, I wrote what I was most influenced by.
But as you go on, you realize that quite possibly there is a way of doing things that is a little more original than that.
Do writers get to the point where they have a choice of following recipes and guaranteeing money
or deciding to try something new and risking the fact that maybe this isn't going to work out?
Well, the fact is that most science fiction has sort of built in sales potential.
A science fiction book will sell between 30 or 50,000 copies no matter who wrote it.
This is unfortunate. Most of the best writers of science fiction however become their own genres.
Clarke, Gazzemop, Heinlein are genres unto themselves within the genre.
People will buy the name no matter what they write.
This is also unfortunate but it is a sign of some progress on the part of the writer.
I think even if you write a fairly experimental kind of book like Macro-Ike,
because of the built-in potential there will be a certain number of readers who will buy it.
There will be a smaller number of people who actually buy it because they are interested in that kind of thing.
Maybe their tastes will be widened by it.
You really can't tell. You just have to do what you really want to do.
You can't simply write to fill a niche in the market.
That's what strikes me as being very cynical in many writers.
They do aim for a particular audience and they aim to deliver a certain product
and they don't seem to have any other ambitions.
This would be fine if some of these writers were not capable of more,
in which case they are betraying their own abilities.
This kind of comment on my part sounds perhaps very noble to many other writers
and very idealistic and they sort of shake their heads in the way that
Claggett shook his head at Billy Budd's innocence.
But that kind of attitude comes out of the environment in which they move.
I think you can create for yourself an ambitious environment in which you will produce,
or at least have a shot at producing something that will be closer to what you are capable of doing.
Let's bring up the topic of critics in science fiction.
There don't seem to be a lot of good ones, if there ever were.
What do you think as an author that critics should look for when they're reviewing a work?
Well, they should primarily, if I would make any advice to would-be critics,
is not to try to rewrite the book for the author and to hoist the author by his own guitar
to not that of the critic.
Most critics, I'm afraid, are self-appointed.
It's very easy to simply appoint yourself a reviewer or critic
and start publishing criticism and then you acquire a few credits and you do more.
It's something that I don't believe that young writers should do at all.
I did a lot of criticism when I was just beginning and I don't think I acquitted myself very honorably
at all. You tend to overpray on the one hand and you tend to ignore things that you don't like.
Criticism is something that should be a very small part of any literature.
There are some good critics, but that's a career in itself and ultimately a good critic
is a person who writes a kind of literature.
Edmund Wilson or Lionel Trilling or people of that caliber are very rare.
Science fiction has no good critics.
After Damon Knight, James Blisch gave up.
Alfred Bester was literally held it out of reviewing because he was so hard on everything.
The people who criticize now are people simply looking to make a name for themselves
by writing reviews of better writers' works.
In your background you were a fan, a writer, a critic.
Now let's talk a little bit about being an editor.
How did you get involved in editing and does editing, is that practice that the expense of maybe not doing as much writing yourself?
Well I think both good writers edit because they wish to influence the field.
They're curious to see what they can elicit from other writers.
I'm talking primarily about original anthologies or magazine, original magazines which publish new stories.
You do it because you have an idea of how it should be done.
John Campbell once said when I edit I am a hundred different writers.
He would make suggestions to many of his writers and they would follow through.
Many of the novels with Heinlein and Vasselbaum and others were originally suggestions made by John Campbell.
Then each of these writers of course carries out the idea in a very different way.
So it's a Campbell meant by saying that I'm a hundred different writers when I edit and I'm only one writer when I write.
But that's perhaps a little too easy.
I want to edit when I do and I don't want to do it all the time to influence how science fiction is written
and to help produce the kinds of works that will set a different example.
I had only limited opportunities to do this.
I've edited five anthologies, some of them original, some of them not.
I think they reflect the kind of science fiction that I would like to see written.
Although if I really hold to the standard I would have to say that however well these books have done, they are failures according to my outlook.
Ultimately you have to accept as an editor the best that you can get and that may not reach the level that you desire.
Who broaches the subject of a book which is to be edited? Do you get called by the publisher and he says...
In each case I originated the concept of the anthology.
If I was doing it in collaboration with somebody else then the other editor and I put this out on the market and a publisher who was interested would simply offer a contract.
Did you ever meet John Campbell?
Yes, I spent six hours in his office I think it was in 1970.
Just before a year or so before his death I don't remember the exact date.
It was quite an experience.
Let's switch now to your...
You'd like me to talk about Campbell?
Yes please do. I would welcome that.
I think I can sum up Campbell's attitudes.
He was sitting behind his desk puffing away at his cigarette holder.
Very anxious to have a discussion that would not be him agreeing with me or me agreeing with him.
He picked up a copy I think of Orbit by Damon Knight and a copy of Fantasy and Science Fiction.
The interesting thing is the writers in these two books write beautifully but they don't think very much.
He said the great problem with science fiction is you have people who write beautifully and don't think and you have people who think gorgeously and can't write.
It impressed me because I've always believed that the secret to writing science fiction was to combine a whole set of virtues in one writer.
It seems to be a very difficult thing to do.
However, I do believe that these various virtues that go to make good science fiction thinking and writing well for example can be developed in intelligent writers in the same way that people develop theirs.
The strength of various fingers when they practice the piano.
But they don't start early, they don't do it consciously, they don't really try.
They settle for what actually sells and then it gets published and then they don't work beyond that point.
I was very impressed with Campbell and he valued disagreement above easy agreement.
He told me if you agree with me I'll change my mind.
Great teacher in one respect.
He still has quite an influence on the field which I know some people don't consider all that in that much of a positive fashion.
Do you think that his influence was positive overall?
I think it was positive and I think his disciples do not make the best case for him.
They do not represent his ideas and I think that it's the worst of John Campbell's effect on writers and on the publishing of science fiction that has come in for deserved attack.
The kind of interpretation of Campbell that makes sense out of Campbell's approach.
I think Greg Benford put it, Campbell basically wanted broader horizons and a deeper sense of humanity in his writers.
And that's the kind of defense that is not made of John W. Campbell.
I think that John Campbell's legitimate heirs are people like Ursula Gwynne, Gregory Benford, perhaps Arthur C. Clarke, Philip K. Dick, Gene Wolfe.
The writers who bring a sense of human character into an area of broader horizons in ideas and considering the future of science and technology and considering many of the softer sciences.
I think those are the people who defend Campbell along the lines of, you know, let's have more hard science and engineering in our fiction.
Don't really understand what he was trying to do.
I think it was James Blish who said that when you say hard science fiction, what he meant by it is hard science fiction across the board.
Hard thinking, fine writing, hard characterization, that unity of values that I alluded to before.
That's what Campbell really pointed to.
And of course he failed to bring about this kind of science fiction, although he had some success.
Anybody would have to fail to some degree.
But I think the people who defend Campbell are usually those who turn off the literary or ambitious writer.
Now let's change topics and discuss your individual works.
Our first exposure to you in novel form was the Omega Point, which we now know is the middle of a trilogy.
What was it intended to be when you first wrote it?
Well, I originally intended it to be a colorful, ice and stiny space opera.
Anyone who's seen the film, Sergei Ice, is probably like Alexander Netski, or Ivan the Terrible, would see what I mean by that.
The characters were colorful, intense, filled with characters who were always on edge.
I simply wanted to carry out a certain kind of aesthetic wish, and I'm afraid that I fell into a certain kind of science fiction.
The book has been called a Metacysical Space Opera by Peter Nichols with Science Fiction and Psychopedia.
And it is that.
And I don't think that it's a departure for me in any way. I think it was what I could do at the time.
There is a fair amount of my background in the story.
I suppose if I wanted to be psychoanalytic, I came out of a ruined Europe.
I grew up in England, in New York, and I suppose the main character is also the survivor of a destroyed people.
So it's sort of allegorical, I suppose.
This happened before in science fiction.
There's a book called The Falling Torch by Alges Budris, which is a thinly disguised story about a Lithuanian exile,
going back to leader revolt against his people, the pressers.
Budris is an exile also from Soviet-dominated Lithuania.
I suppose you could say that the Omega Point dealt with themes of this kind.
I see it as the ghosts of the Hitlerian War, you know, walking through a metaphysical space opera.
And in the revenge theme, I suppose, there is a kind of strength.
The book went into seven, eight foreign editions and did quite well in its original paperback.
But I think that when I finally produced the final three volumes, they're produced as one book by my publishers.
It will be considerably improved, but I think it will have the same colorful space opera kind of background.
It'll never be better than a certain kind of genre of science fiction.
I don't mind that kind of science fiction, but I wish it were better done than it has been in the past.
It's going to be republished. It's going to be in an improved version.
Well, in effect, the three volumes, Ashes of the Star, the Omega Point, and I think the third part will be called Mirror of Science,
although that's not quite certain yet.
All three volumes will have been rewritten from scratch, in effect, to produce the kind of overall intention that I have for the books.
They're really one book. That's what they are.
Why do you choose to rewrite old works instead of just laying them aside and going on to something else?
Well, this is only going to happen twice. The middle Omega book I rewrote, but that's because there is a larger work to which it belongs.
It's a question of making the work even throughout to the quality of writing.
I think that although the original Omega Point had a certain kind of energy, it was a very young book.
I don't think it did as well as it should have for that theme.
It's unfinished business. That's really what it is.
The same thing with Starweb, which is the first of three volumes.
So I can't just leave the first volume as it is and do the other two volumes. The first one would stick out as a sore thumb.
In time, these six books, I suppose, will be out as two books, each one in three parts, but they are essentially one work.
So you have two books total. So the question of finishing up old business, I'm not rewriting old books for the sake of rewriting old books.
And I'll probably never do this again.
The trick is to write it as well as you deserve the first time.
And I think I've done that with other works. I'll never rewrite the stories in my story collection, for example, or rewrite MacroLife.
They don't need that.
A catchy thing about the Omega Point and the sequel, Lashes and Stars, is that you have all sorts of quotes interspersed among the chapters.
Do you keep a notebook of quotes? Do you purposely look for them? How do you remember them all?
Well, I do have a notebook in which I write down things that strike me.
And they started out primarily as springboards of theme and action for various parts of the Omega Trilogy.
And after a while I said, well, why not put them in anyway?
And the response I've had, I probably should leave them in, although I think that in the one volume edition they'll be set in very small type at the beginning of each chapter.
I've been of two minds over this, whether to leave it out or not. I don't know what they add to the overall book, but perhaps they add a kind of thoughtfulness that would be otherwise missing.
As an aside, I definitely agree. They do.
I was very happy to hear that from somebody else besides myself.
Okay, Starlet was one of the few pretty good laser books. How did you get convinced to write a laser book?
Well, I was with many other writers of the 70s who came to prominence in the 70s.
Roger O would contact at least 100 writers. Other writers would have written quite a few stories for Roger or Barry Maltzberg, Gene Wolfe, Phillip Palmer,
or anyone you can think of. Just go look in your content over at Theography.
You'll see how many writers wrote stories for Roger's endless pit of demands.
I was asked to write one of the laser books, and I didn't concoct the laser book.
I simply submitted a book that I was planning to write anyway, and it went over.
I regret that I had to write it in such a short period of time, which is why I've rewritten it.
But the proof of perhaps the book's quality is that it has gone from a laser paperback to a volume one of a double-day trilogy in hardcover.
Very few books make the passage from paperback into hardcover. It goes the other way, usually.
You had at least one other association with Roger L. Wood.
I think I wrote about 12 stories for him, all total.
Roger L. Wood is...
They were stories that I was writing anyway, and he simply said, OK, I'll commission it.
As soon as the story was ready, it turns out that he bought it.
Roger L. Wood is often reviled now for various reasons.
Do you think that he had an overall positive effect on the field?
Well, the problem with Roger L. Wood goes two ways.
One, science fiction writers are generally irreligious.
They want to see what they write published.
Roger was a religious person. I think he's a Baptist who had some very strong ideas as to what science fiction should be.
Although, if you look at what he bought, he bought about the same kind of thing that almost anybody else would buy.
His positive effect is that he gave a lot of life and a lot of living to many, many writers who would not have been able to write and publish as much.
The problem is that he brought out the worst in many writers.
He had such a large need for fiction that he bought just about everything that most writers could produce.
Even works that he would reject.
Later, when an opportunity would present itself, he would buy the work.
He would get back to you and say, you know that story I rejected six months ago?
I think I have a place where I could use it and then he would buy it.
The difficulty with this is that no matter what editor was doing what Roger did, they would have this problem.
Namely, that there is a limited amount of first-rate material.
If you have certain numbers of pages to fill, he had about 70 anthologies to his credit, I think, with various magazine editing stints.
No matter who was doing what Roger did, they would have to fill those pages up, especially if they'd signed contracts.
Eventually, the criterion became that of minimal professionalism.
If something was professional and readable and if it fit the particular anthology, it went.
Roger ran up against the difficulty of getting work at a high level in a short period of time.
It just can't be done.
It's partially his fault and that he provided the opportunity,
but I think it's also the fault of the field that the level of writing and ambition was so low
that we were producing at this level.
Most of the stories he bought were not concocted for him.
They were stories that these writers were writing or had in their trunk.
Many writers sold him all their trunk of material that had not been published elsewhere.
Is that clear enough on that?
That's great. That's what I wanted to know.
We'll ask one more question, then we'll flip our tape.
Your collection of...
Before we just go on, I'd like to say that there are half a dozen Elwood anthologies to that are outstanding
and that will probably deserve to remain in print the continuum series of four books of EPAAH
Showcase, just to name the best.
Okay. Your collection, The Monadic Universe, appeared.
Three of the stories that I came across in there, the history machine, the Cleometrican,
assuming that's the correct pronunciation, and Stance of Splendor showed quite a divergence in style
from the other stories that you'd written.
They were reminiscent of new wave style stories.
Were you experimenting with your style in these stories?
Well, when I started out, I corresponded with people like Michael Moore-Cock and various other writers in England
and I published quite a few stories in New World.
I didn't try to particularly write for that market, but I felt that here were possibilities that I was not following through in other stories
and I was very happy to have them published.
The history machine, for example, was originally commissioned for another anthology from Valentine
and when that materialized, Michael Moore-Cock bought it.
Thank you.